NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
VERTICAL PRODUCTION NETWORKS
IN MULTINATIONAL FIRMS
Gordon H. Hanson
Raymond J. Mataloni, Jr.
Matthew J. Slaughter
Working Paper  9723
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9723
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2003
For assistance with data we thank Bruce Blonigen, Fritz  Foley, Jon Haveman, and James Rauch. For helpful
comments we thank David Belli, Lael Brainard, Fritz Fo ley, Ann Harrison, Jim Hines, Ned Howenstine, Tom
Hubbard, Jorg Mayer, Peter Merrill , Richard Sansing, Doug Staiger, Adrian Tschoegl, Obie Whichard,
William Zeile and conference and seminar participan ts at the American Economics Association, the
Brookings Institution and Internationa l Tax Policy Forum, Erasmus University, the Federal Reserve Board,
the London School of Economics, the National Bureau of  Economic Research, Stanford University, the U.S.
Bureau of Economic Analysis, University of Chicago Graduate School of Business, the Wharton School, and
Yale University. For financial s upport Hanson and Slaughter gratefu lly acknowledge the National Science
Foundation. Views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the
Bureau of Economic Analysis. The statistical analysis  of firm-level data on U.S. multinational companies
reported in this study was conducted at the International Investment Division, U.S. Bureau of EconomicAnalysis, under arrangements that maintained legal c onfidentiality requirements.  The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and not necessarily tho se of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Gordon H. Hanson, Raymond J. Mataloni, and Matthew J. Slaughter.  All rights reserved. Short
sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be  quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit including © notice, is given to the source.Vertical Production Networks in Multinational Firms
Gordon H. Hanson, Raymond J. Mataloni, and Matthew J. SlaughterNBER Working Paper No. 9723May 2003JEL No. F2, F1, L1
ABSTRACT
In recent decades, growth of overall world trade ha s been driven in large part by the rapid growth
of trade in intermediate inputs. Much of this input trade involves multinational firms locating inputprocessing in their foreign affiliates, thereby cr eating global vertical produ ction networks. In this
paper, we use firm-level data on U.S. multinationals to examine trade in intermediate inputs forfurther processing between parent firms and their foreign affiliates. We estimate affiliate demandfor imported inputs as a function of  host-country and industry trade co sts, factor prices, and other
variables. Among our main findings are that dema nd for imported inputs is higher when affiliates
face lower trade costs, lower wages for less-skilled labor (both in absolute terms and relative towages for more-skilled labor), and lower corporate income tax rates. These results contrast withmany findings in previous research.
Gordon H. HansonRaymond J. Mataloni, Jr.
IR/PS U.S. Department of Commerce 
University of California, San Diego Bureau of Economic Analysis 9500 Gilman Drive Mail Stop: BE-50 La Jolla, CA 92093-0519 1441 L Street, NW and NBER Washington, DC 20230
gohanson@ucsd.edu    raymond.mataloni@bea.gov  
 Matthew J. Slaughter
Tuck School of BusinessDartmouth College100 Tuck HallHanover, NH 03755and NBERmatthew.slaughter@dartmouth.edu  
1.  Introduction  
 History has  seen m ultiple waves of “globa lization.” On m any measures, recent decades 
constitute another such wave.  All waves are not the sam e, howev er.  Two novel fe atures of the 
curren t process of globalization are increas ed trade in inte rmediate inpu ts and inc reased flows of 
foreign direct investm ent (FDI). 
 Interm ediate inputs p lay an im portant role in th e recent g rowth  of world trade.  Yeats (2001) 
finds that trade in inputs has grown m uch faster than trade in final goods, and he estim ates that 
interm ediates now account for 30% of  world trade in m anufactures.1  Humm els, Ishii, and Yi 
(2001) identify vertical specialization, which th ey define as production arrangem ents in which 
firms make final goods via m ultiple stages located in multiple countries,  as an im portant asp ect 
of overall input trade.2  They calculate that from  1970 to 1990, the increase in exports associated 
with vertical specialization accounted for one-thi rd of world export growth.  During the early 
20th century, in contrast, inputs played only a small role in U.S. trade (Feenstra, 1998). 
 As for FDI , the rising  share of multinat ional enterprises in overall productio n helps  
distinguish the current phase of  globalization from  previous episodes (Bordo, Eichengreen, and 
Irwin, 1999).  Multinatio nals now me diate a larg e fraction of world trade.  In the United States , 
they account for over half of total exports (Slaug hter, 2000).  W ithin m anufacturing, the m ajority 
of these exports are of  interm ediates.  In 1999 , 93% of exports by U.S. parent firm s to their 
foreign m anufacturing affiliates were input s for further pro cessing (U.S. BEA, 2002). 
 Parent-to-affiliate input trade is one elem ent of wh at we shall call vertical p roduction  
networks  in multinationa ls.  The ter m “vertica l” capture s two key f eatures of  these networks:  (i) 
within these  firms the parent and e ach affiliate performs a narrow r ather th an bro ad range of  
                                                 
1 See also Campa and Goldb erg (1 997). 
 1    
production activ ities and  (ii) th e parent and its a ffiliates are linked by intra-firm  flows of inputs 
and outputs.  In the jargon of trade theory, ver tical production networks ar e a for m of “vertical 
FDI” throug h which m ultination als spread a cross different location s the different ac tivitie s tha t 
they perform, such as R&D, i nput production, and input processing. 
 To fix ideas on vertical production netw orks, consider the well-known example of 
autom obile production in North American Free Tr ade Agreem ent (NAFTA) countries.  Canadian 
and Mexican auto plants have extensive intra-firm  links with their U.S. counterparts, m ediated 
by large flows of inputs across bord ers.  It is estim ated that every day $250 m illion in autos and  
auto parts crosses the Am bassador Bridge that  connects Detroit, Michigan with W indsor, 
Ontario.  When the U.S. governm ent closed this bridge and other entry points after the terrorist 
attacks of S eptem ber 11, 2001, several NAFTA auto  plants had to shut down within 48 hours 
because of input shortag es (Counc il on Foreign Relation s, 2002). 
 The extent of vertical production networks , however, varies acr oss both countries and 
industries.  In Brazil, which is protected by common external tariffs under the Common Market 
of the Southern Cone ( Mercosu r), multinationa l auto m anufacturer s tend to se t up integ rated 
production facilities that engage in  relatively little in ternational trade with their parent firm s or 
with other affiliates of the sam e parent (Hanson,  2001).  In m any countries, other in dustries, such 
as chem icals and non-m etallic m inerals, al so exhibit high degrees of integration. 
 What accounts for this variation?   Theories we  discuss below offer several explanations for 
vertical production networks, incl uding cross-country and/or cross- industry differences in trade 
costs, factor prices, and the technological separa bility of production.  While there is anecdotal 
evidence to support these theori es, little work goes beyond docum enting broad facts to provide a 
                                                                                                                                                             
2 This phenomenon has been given various na mes, including de-localization , disinteg ration of production , fragmentation , globa l 
production  sharing, for eign ou tsourcing, an d slicing up th e value chain .  See Feen stra and  Hanson (2002) for a discussion.  
 2    
theore tically informed, m icro-leve l empirical an alysis  of the im portance of these explanations.  
In this p aper we provide such an ana lysis using f irm-level data on U.S. multin ation als. 
 These data com e from  legally m andated conf idential surveys conducted by the U.S. Bureau 
of Econom ic Analysis ( BEA) of  all U.S. m ultinationals.  Fo r majority-owned f oreign af filiates  in 
manufacturing in 1994, we have a direct m easure of input flows associated with vertical 
production networks:  imports from U.S. parent firm s (and other U.S. entities) of interm ediate  
inputs for further processing.3  We use a standard cost-m inimization fram ework to derive the 
demand for  imported inputs by foreign affiliates, and we then estimate the sens itivity of this  
demand to host-country/industry trad e costs, factor prices, taxes,  and other variables suggested 
by theory.  Our estim ation com bines data from  the BEA surveys with d ata from  outside sou rces 
on host-country policies and charac teristics.  Having com prehensiv e data on the foreign activities 
of U.S. multina tiona ls allows us to  address s everal im portant e stimation issu es, such as th e 
absence of data on transaction prices be tween parent firm s and their affiliates. 
 Our em pirical analysis yields a num ber of resu lts on the determ inants of vertical production 
networks in  multinatio nal firm s.  One is th at imports of interm ediate inputs are s trongly 
negativ ely correlated with trade co sts facing aff iliates.  Our preferred estim ates, which appear 
robust to a range of estim ation choices, im ply an  elasticity well over unity :  a 1% fall in trade 
costs lead s to a 2%-4 % increase in the quan tity of im ported in termediate inputs for further  
processing.  This responsiveness of  vertical production ne tworks to trade costs appears consistent 
with recen t theoretical work (e.g., Yi, 2003) in which s mall chang es in tariffs produce larg e 
changes in input trade.  Previous empirical work on m ultinationals (e. g., Carr, Markusen, and  
                                                 
3 We exam ine one com ponent o f verti cal produ ction networks:  the processing b y foreign af filiates of int ermediate input s 
imported from their U.S. par ents.  Unfo rtunately , the BEA data do not track pr oduc tion networks involving ar m’s-length inter -
firm transactions .  We do not ob serve proce ssing trade between U.S. parent s and foreign entities that they  do not own.  Thus, o ur 
data ar e not well suited  to consid er questions of o ptimal  firm boun daries.  
 3    
Maskus, 2001), finds that the scale of fore ign-affiliate operations is greater th e higher are host-
country tarif fs and transportation costs.  These resu lts have been interpreted to m ean that higher 
trade co sts encourage F DI.  W hen a m ultinatio nal intends to sell good s in a particular foreign  
market, higher trade costs m ay indeed encourag e locating production in that m arket.  But our 
results sugg est th at when m ultinatio nals serve various foreign m arkets via vertical production 
networks, higher trade costs m ay deter FDI instead. 
 A second finding is that vertical pro duction ne tworks are sensitiv e to labor costs.  Imported-
input dem and is decreasing in host-country wages for less-skilled workers and increasing in host-
country wages for m ore-skilled work ers.  Here again, our results contrast with  previous em pirical 
literature (e.g., Brainard, 1997), whic h tends to find that, if anything, U.S. firm s prefer to locate  
in high-wag e countries.   W e find that foreign  affiliates d o more processing of imports in 
countries with relatively cheap less-skilled labor. 
 A third finding is that vertical production networks also depend on other host-country 
policies and characteristics.  Imported-input dem and is higher in host countries with export-
processing zones, and is decreasi ng in host-country m arket size a nd corporate tax rates.  W hile 
many studies docum ent how taxes affect aggreg ate FDI (Hines, 2001), th ere is little work on 
how taxes or other hos t-countries polic ies affect th e com position of FDI. 
 Our paper has four additional sections.  In sect ion 2 we discu ss related  research.  In section 3 
we presen t our em pirical fram ework.  In section 4 we discuss the data and present summ ary 
statistics.  In section 5 we report our estim ation results.  A nd in section 6 we conclude. 
 
2.  Related Research 
 Our work is relevant to several bodies of  literature on trade in interm ediate inputs and 
multinationa l ente rprises.  The f irst is rese arch on the im pact of  declinin g trade  barriers.  Man y 
 4    
studies conjecture that falling tr ade costs contribute to vertical  production netw orks.  In an 
important recent paper, Yi (2003)  argues that standard m odels of trade in final goods cannot 
account for how the m odest observed declines in trade ba rriers could have produced the dram atic 
observed growth in wor ld trade.  Yi shows theo retically how trade in inputs allows declining 
trade barriers to trigge r magnified decreases in production cost s and thus dram atic increases in 
total trade flows.  W e exam ine (and find support for) this hypothesis by es timating the sensitivity 
of de mand for im ported interm ediate inputs to trade costs. 
 The second body of literature to wh ich our pap er relates is  empirical work on theories of 
multinationa l firms.  Theory tend s to view m ultination als as the  result of  eithe r horizonta l 
expansion (in which firm s save on trade costs associated with exporting by setting up foreign 
facilities whose range of producti on activities m irrors th e operations they perform  at hom e) or 
vertical expansion (in w hich firm s fragm ent diffe rent production stages ac ross different countries 
to arbitr age inte rnational di fferences in factor prices).4  Casual evidence s uggests that horizontal 
FDI is the dom inant strategy of U.S. m ultinat ionals.  In 1998, OECD countries accounted for 
76.6% of sales by affiliates of U.S. firm s (Hanson, et  al, 200 1), givin g the impression  that m arket 
size (and not wage levels ) is th e host-country feature U.S. m ultinationa ls care m ost about. 
 Several rec ent stud ies te st theo ries of FDI rigorously by using aggreg ate data on th e tota l 
sales of U.S. foreign affiliates by country (or by country and industry). 5  Most studies find that 
affiliate sales are high er in larger cou ntries and  in countries  with h igher tariffs and transport costs  
on U.S. goods, but not in countries  with larger  skill differences relative to the United States. 
These resu lts are in terpreted as evid ence in fa vor of horizontal FDI a nd against vertical FDI.  
                                                 
4 On the former, see Markusen ( 2002) and Mark usen and Venab les (2000).  On the latter, see Helpman (1984), Helpman and 
Krugman (1985), and  Yeap le (2001).  Ekholm, Forslid, and  Markusen (2003 ) model “export platform” FDI, in which most  
affiliate ou tput is exported  out of  the hos t countr y, an affiliate activit y that shares b oth horizontal and vertical f eatures. 
 5    
 In our work, we do not treat ho rizon tal and vertical FDI as  mutually exclusive options.  The 
same U.S. multinationa l might choo se to op erate in Fran ce an integ rated plant to p roduce f or the 
domestic market and m ight also choose to operate  in China a specialized  factory to assem ble 
components m anufactured by the U.S. parent.   Th e Fren ch affiliate woul d be the resu lt of 
horizon tal FDI, the Chin ese af filiate vertical FDI.   Having f irm-level data  allows us to exam ine 
the factors that determ ine where different affilia tes fall in a continuum  with pure horizontal FDI 
at one extrem e and pure vertical FDI at the othe r extrem e.  This goes beyond previous research 
by address ing the factors  that sh ape the composition of production inside affiliates. 
 Existing work m ost closely related to our s includes Feinberg a nd K eane (2001), who 
exam ine the determ inants of  bilate ral trade betw een U.S. parents and their Canadian af filiate s 
over the period 1983-19 92.  They find that affiliate total imports from  U.S.  parents have little 
association with Canadian tariffs, though in the re verse direction they find that parent im ports  
from Canadian af filiates negativ ely v ary with Ca nadian tar iffs.  They als o find that import f lows 
have no correlation with Canadian  or U.S. wages.  Our work differs from  theirs by focusing on 
trade in in termediate inp uts, ra ther th an tota l trade, and by an alyzing af filiate s world wide, rath er 
than just in Canada.  Their finding of no wage  impacts on parent-affiliate trad e, for exam ple, 
might si mply reflect sm all Canadian-U.S. wage di fferences.  In support of this idea, Hanson, 
Mataloni, and Slaughter (2001) an d Borga and Zeile (2002) find that  foreign affiliates of U.S. 
multinationals engage in relatively more intra-firm trade in lo w-wage countries.6 
 Other bodies of literatu re to which  our work  relates inclu des stud ies on the labor-m arket 
consequences of foreign outsourcing (see the survey in Feenstra and Hanson, 2002), em pirical 
                                                                                                                                                             
5 See Brain ard (1997); Markusen and Maskus (1999); Blonig en, Davies, and  Head (2002) ; and  Helpman, Melitz, and Yeap le 
(2003).  Yeaple (2001) finds t he im pact of  host-countr y education on affili ate sal es to be weaker for less-skill-intensiv e 
industries, suggesting th at multination als in these industries pr efer less-skill-abund ant coun tries. 
 6    
studies on the m agnitude of spillovers associated  with FDI (e.g., Haskel, Pereira, and Slaughter, 
2001), and recent theoretical wo rk on how trade costs shape ownership and  outsourcin g 
decis ions in multinational firm s (Grossm an and Helpm an, 2002a,b). 
 
3.  An Empirical Model 
 In this s ection, we develop an em pirical fram ework for how U.S. m ultinationals organize th e 
operations o f their f oreign affiliates.  Consisten t with our d ata, we f ocus on af filiate operations a t 
a given point in tim e (see note 7).  We assum e that U.S. parent firm s have previously chosen in 
which countries  to locate affilia tes.  The rem aining decision  is over which productio n activities  
affiliates sh ould perf orm.  For simplic ity, cons ider two pro duction s tages:  inpu t manuf acturing  
and input processing.  Input m anufac turing often involves produc ing sophisticated componentry, 
and so is likely to be relatively skill and capital intensive.  Input processing often is lim ited to 
assem bly, and so is likely to be re latively labo r intensiv e. 
 Consider tw o alternative strategies for FDI.  A vertical production network  would have 
foreign affiliates im port inputs from their U.S. p arents, p rocess thes e inputs into fin al products,  
and then ship these processed inpu ts on to destination m arkets.  By locating labor-intensive input 
processing abroad and capital-intensive input pr oduction in the United States, this strategy could 
allow the multinationa l to take ad vantage of  inte rnational dif ferences in f actor prices.  But 
shipping inputs between countries results in high transport costs.   An alternative strategy would 
have foreign  affiliates b oth produce and pro cess input s.  In this case, the firm  replicates ab road 
the production activities  of the U.S. parent.  This strategy minim izes transport costs, since there 
is no need  for affiliates to im port in puts, but it also pr events the m ultinationa l from taking  full 
                                                                                                                                                             
6 For related evidence, see Kumar (1994) and B arba Navar etti, Haaland , and V enables (2002).  Again using ag gregated data, 
Shatz (2000)  and Markusen and Maskus (2001) stud y the exporti ng behav ior of  U.S. m ultination als. 
 
 7    
advantage of factor-price differe nces across countries.  In r eality, firm s may choos e a strategy 
between th e two extr emes jus t desc ribed, with th is choice depending on trad e costs,  labor costs, 
and on other host-country and industry characteristics. 
 
3.1  Empirical Specification 
 Consider a foreign affiliate of a U.S. parent firm.  Let the cost f unctio n for the affiliate be 
C(w, Y).  Here, Y repr esents af filiate to tal outp ut and w is a vector of fact or prices facing the 
affiliate, in cluding wage rates for labor used in input produ ction, wage rates for lab or used in 
input processing, the rental price of capital, th e price of m anufacturing inputs im ported from  the 
parent, and the price of services im ported from  the parent. 
 There are two item s to note about this cost structure.  The firs t is its static nature.  This 
follows f rom our data being a cros s-sec tion an d not a panel of  affiliate s.7  The second is that we 
assum e the af filiate  cost f unction is separab le from that of  the U.S. par ent.  Th is allows us to  
exam ine activity choices of affilia tes in isolatio n, and is ap propr iate so  long as inpu t production 
and input processing are technolog ically sep arable activities and affiliate s face output prices set 
on the world m arket.  In the es timation, we allo w for the possibility that within a m ulti-affiliate 
firm, the sa me affiliate s of a giv en U.S. pare nt use  sim ilar produ ction techno logy and f ace 
common prices for inputs or serv ices im ported from  the parent. 
 To derive an estim ating equation, we need to se lect a functional form  for costs.  A convenient 
choice is the translog form , which Diewert (1974) introduced and Kohli (1978, 1991) used 
initially in the inte rnatio nal-trade literature.  In o ur case, th is function can be written as 
                                                 
7 Data on input tr ade between aff iliates and their U.S. parents do exist for a few othe r BEA “benchmark” years (e.g., 1989).  We 
have not add ed these years to our sam ple becau se for earli er years we lack co rresponding non-BEA data on k ey regression  
variab les.  Adding additi onal years would prob ably not greatly  enhance the es timation .  Over shor t to medium time horizons, the 
prim ary variation in key  variab les includi ng wages, tariffs, and tax rates is across countries and not time.  Having ad ditional  years  
of data would allow us to contr ol for affi liate fixed eff ects, but  this would co me at the po tential cost of losi ng m uch of the  
 8    
         
Ylnwln Yln Ylnwlnwln wln Cln
h
hyH
1h2
yy21
yjH
1hH
1jh
hj21H
1hh
h 0
φ+ β+β+γ +α+α=
∑∑∑ ∑
=== =   (1) 
where wh denotes the prices of  the optim ally chosen variable inputs h=1,…,H. 
 The usefulness of the translog function becom es eviden t when we com pute first derivative s, 
∂lnC/∂lnwh = (∂C/∂wh)(wh/C).  By Shepard’s L emma, ∂C/∂wh equals the dem and for input h.  It 
follows that ( ∂C/∂wh)(wh/C), the ela sticity of  total cost with respect to price h, equals the share of 
factor h in total co sts, which we denote by the cost-share sh.  Differentiating equation (1) with 
respec t to ln wh yields the following expression, 
     ,        (2) Yln wln shyH
1jj
hj hhφ+γ+α=∑
=
for h=1,…,H.8  The expression in (2) re lates the dem and for input h, measured as its share in 
total costs, to prices of variab le inputs and the level of output. 
 These cos t shares are th e bas is for o ur empirical work.  W e estim ate the cost-share equatio n 
for the key input of i mported interm ediates for further processing, and we denote the share of 
imported interm ediate in puts in tota l costs by sm.9  We interp ret af filiates with higher  values of 
sm to be a ffiliates that are m ore specialized in the activity of processing parent-produced inputs.  
                                                                                                                                                             
systematic variation in our regr essors.  Even with just a singl e year of data, we are able to contr ol for parent-b y-industr y fixed 
effects.  This,  as we discuss, allows us to a ddress wha t appear to be the more important  estim ation issues—e.g., measuring pric es. 
8 In the  even t there are cons tant returns  to scale, φhy=0.  W e fin d evid ence cons istent with affiliate technolog y being constant 
returns.  That aff iliates exhibi t constant returns in no way implies that parents  do as  well  (given  the importance o f R&D and o ther 
fixed costs in  parent op erations, we expect their technolog y to exhibit increasing  returns).  
9 Given data limitations , we cann ot estimate cost shares for other inputs.  BEA data only  report aggregate emplo yment of capital 
and labor for an affiliate.  When an aff iliate, say , hires labor we do not know whether it is to produce inputs, pro cess inputs , or 
both.  B y estim ating a sing le cost-share  equation, we canno t impose cross-equation parameter restric tions im plied b y the 
symmetry of cross-price de rivatives and b y the fact that the cost shares sum to on e. 
 9    
Accordingly , we in terpret our estimates of the sm equation to inform  about the determ inants of 
vertical production networ ks in m ultinational firm s.10 
 Given our d efinition  of sm, an estim ating equation for affili ate a  in ind ustry i be longing to 
U.S. parent p and locate d in host-country c is, 
 
m
aipc aipc myhq
ipc mom
ipc mm aipc mku
c mus
c ms ipm
aipcYln pln pln rln wln wln s ε+ φ+ γ+ γ+ γ+ γ+ γ+α=
        (3) 
 
where is a parent- and industry-specific constant term ;  is the price o f skilled lab or in 
country c;  is the price o f unskilled labor in c; ripαs
cw
u
cw aipc is the af filiate ’s ren tal price of  capital; p 
(p) is the price of interm ediate inputs (headqu arter services) im porte d from  parent p in 
industry i and country c; Ym
ipc
hq
ipc
aipc is af filiate outpu t; and  is a disturbance term . m
aipcε
 After estim ating equa tion (3) it is  straigh tforward to calculate the c ross- and own-price  
elasticities of factor dem and.  The own-price elasticity of demand for factor m, i mported 
interm ediate inputs, is given by, 
   mm m
mm
mms)1s(sPED−+γ=   (4) 
where mmγis a param eter to be es timated and  is calculated  at the m ean for the reg ression  
sample.  The cross-price elasticity of de mand between inputs m and h is given by, ms
   mhm
mh
mhsssPED+γ=   (5) 
                                                 
10 Strictly  speakin g, our in terpr etation of sm require s the assum ption that affiliates all sell th e sam e output in terms of t he loc ation 
on the  valu e-add ed chain.  Other wise, diff erences in cos t shares could r eflect differenc es in affiliate location along the  chain of 
production , independent of the range of ac tivities affiliates perform.  The BEA da ta contain no such information on output stag es, 
as is th e case for  man y similar  micro-le vel data sets.  See Adelman  (1955) for  a discussion of th ese measurement issues. 
 10    
An advantage of the translog fram ework is that  it does not im pose restri ctions on the pair-wise 
elasticities o f substitutio n between inputs (as do Cobb-Douglas or CES). 
 
3.2  Estimation Issues 
 Several im portan t estimation issues  merit atte ntion.  One is that we do not have data on p 
or , the transaction prices that affiliates pay for inputs and se rvices they im port from  their 
parents.   This lim itation is hard ly surprising.   There is little p rice d ata for trade flows anywhere,  
let alone for individual busine sses operating in hundreds of count ries and industries.  W e can 
address this problem  by exploiting the structure of the BEA data; sp ecifically, the fact that m ost 
foreign affiliates share a U.S. parent  with at leas t one other affiliate. m
ipc
hq
ipcp
 Suppose that pcan be exp ressed  in log term s as the sum  of two parts:  the f.o.b. price in the 
United States for that im port, and a host-c ountry wedge between that U .S. price and that is 
due to  trade costs.  For exam ple, a U.S. paren t that manufactures electrical applian ces m ay obtain 
tungsten in the United States for all its ligh t-bulb affiliates abroad , but different affiliates m ay 
pay differen t prices  based on the trade cos ts they face.  In  our analys is, we m odel this price 
wedge as th e sum  of import tarif fs and transpo rt costs, a llowing us to write as, m
ipc
m
ipcp
m
ipcp
         (6) )f 1ln( pln plnic icm
ipm
ipc+τ++=
where  is the f.o.b. price of the input in the United States, τm
ipp ic is the ad valorem  tarif f rate tha t 
country c levies on im ports  in industry i, and f ic is the ad valorem  freight rate on imports from 
the United S tates in coun try c f or industry i. 
 We have data on trade costs but not on .  W e do, however, observ e the activities of 
multiple affiliates th at operate in th e sam e industry and that s hare th e sam e parent.  If the paren t m
ipp
 11    
charges  its affiliates  in the sam e industry the sam e f.o.b. price for inputs, then trad e costs will be 
the only source of variation in acros s affiliates in the sam e industry belo nging to the same 
parent.   We can th en measure  in two parts:  (a) a full set of parent-by-industry dumm y 
variables, , which captures industry-and- parent specific technology, αm
ipcp
m
ipcp
m
ip
p
ipmm ip ip pln~γ+α=α ip, 
and the unobservable f.o.b. price, ; and (b) host-country trade co sts, which we m easure using 
data on host-country and i ndustry tariffs, non-tariff barri ers, and freight rates.11 m
ip
~α Allowing for parent-by-industry fi xed effects, rather than just parent effects, allow s for the 
fact that m any m ultinationals ar e multi-product firm s whose affilia tes s pan diverse industries .  
Thus, a parent firm ’s light-bu lb affiliates can  face different im ported-input prices from  its 
refrigerator affiliates.  T hese paren t-by-industry c ontrols also  address differences in th e extent of 
vertical pro duction networks due to technolog ical prim itives or fir m business practices (e.g.,  
networks may be less feasible in food i ndustries with highly perishable inputs). 
 By the sam e logic, we also control for unobservable headquar ter-service prices, .  The  
parent-by-industry controls, hq
ipcp
, capture any unobser ved components of service prices that 
parents charge to all affiliates  in the sam e industry; m easures  of trade costs capture country- 
and/or indu stry-specific com ponents.  Affiliate s may import from parents a wid e range of 
headquarter services, such as use of patents, copyrights, and trademarks , analysis of m arket 
conditions, or advice about m anagem ent strategy.  Paren ts may receive paym ent for these 
services through either fees or repatriated earnings.  The pr ice parents charge m ay vary across 
affiliates du e to tran sport costs ( e.g., more-rem ote affiliates m ay be m ore co stly to s ervice), in a  
manner si milar to im ported m anufacturing inputs.  This price m ay also vary acro ss affiliates du e 
                                                 
11 In host coun tries, multinationa ls are  som etimes accused of  attempting to  influ ence trade po licy to their  advantage.  Given this 
 12    
to host-country corporate incom e taxes (e.g., hi gher tax rates m ay make repatriated earnings less 
attractive), and so we include th is variable as a regressor. 
 An im portant aspect of  measuring both pand  is transfer pricing.  It is commonly 
asser ted tha t multinatio nals pric e intra-f irm transactions s uch that f irm-wide pre-tax prof its 
accrue to affiliates  in lo w-tax ju risdictions.12  We have no direct data on transfer pric ing, but our 
treatment of and  summarized in (6) should control fo r at least som e of any unobservable 
transfer-pricing m otives.  The parent-by-industry controls capture differences in the average 
propensity to transfer price across U .S. parents, which m ay result from  variation in their global 
foreign-tax- credit sta tus with the I nterna l Revenue Service.  And the inclusion of corporate 
incom e tax rates con trols for transf er-pricing motivations that vary across host-countries. m
ipchq
ipcp
m
ipcphq
ipcp
 A second estim ation issue is that w e do not ob serve prices for any interm ediate inputs that  
affiliates  may purchase locally.   In p rinciple,  the price for lo cal inputs  should be an  additional 
regres sor in  equation (3 ).  In p ractice, the se prices m ay be well capture d by our just-discussed 
measures for  and .  If local input prices  are set on the w orld m arket, and so equal to 
world input prices plus trade costs, then including as regr essors parent-by-industry dummy 
variab les an d trade costs  contro ls for their pres ence. m
ipcphq
ipcp
 A third estim ation issue involves the regressa nd.  In our data, th e dependent variable 
takes  a va lue of zero  for many af filiates.  This  may be due to th e techn ologica l infeasibility 
of separatin g input p roduction and  process ing, which would resu lt in an  affiliate strategy of 
integ rating b oth activitie s.  One appr oach to th is problem  would be to incl ude in (3) m easures of 
the technological separability of production as re gressors and then estim ate (3) as a Tobit.  m
aipcs
                                                                                                                                                             
possibilit y, in the estimation we allow for  the pos sible endogen eity of host-co untry industr y tariffs. 
 13    
Below, we experim ent with one  possible industry-level proxy.  The parent-by-industry dummy 
variables could also pr oxy for these m easures, but the pres ence of a large num ber of unobserved 
fixed effects com plicates  use of the Tobit.  W ith few observations per indicator variable category 
(i.e., sm all num bers of affiliates  of the sam e pare nt firm  and in th e sam e industry), there is th e 
risk that Tobit estim ates of param eter coefficients woul d be inconsistent  (Wooldridge, 2002). 
 Instead, we address zero observations in the de pendent variable in two ways.  First, we drop 
from  the sample affiliates in industries in wh ich im ports of inputs for further pro cessing are 
rare.13  The excluded industries—e.g., food processi ng, pulp and paper, newspapers, soap and 
cleansers—appear to be prim arily ones in which either there is a singl e stage of production or 
technology or transport costs m ake it prohibitivel y expensive to geographically separate input  
production and input processing.  Second, we check  the consistency of our OLS estim ates of (3)  
by using a Tobit with a m ore-aggr egate set of indicator v ariable categories.  Fewer parent-
industry combinations increase the observations per category and thus improve consistency. 
 A fourth estim ation issu e is how to m easure wages.  In equation (3) wages are assum ed to 
vary only across countries.  This would be the case  if affiliates are p rice-takers in labor m arkets 
and if labo r markets are national in scope.  In practice, wage s may vary across other dim ensions 
as well.  For instance, wages m ay vary by indu stry, consistent with evidence on inter-industry 
wage dif ferentia ls, and  particular m ultinationa ls m ay offer wage pr emia to attra ct more able 
workers.  In the em pirical analysis, we use as a baseline wages at the country level and 
experim ent with m easures at the ind ustry or af filiate leve l. 
 A final estim ation issue is th at there m ay be country-level policies and characteristics that 
influence h ow foreign af filiates  organize their  activ ities.   To contro l for this  possibility, we 
                                                                                                                                                             
12 See Sansing (1999) for an over view of U.S. tax code reg arding multination al transfer pricing and for a theor etical an alysis of 
transfer-pricing  rules.  For empirical evid ence on  transfer  pricing , see Clausing  (200 1) and Grub ert and Mutti (1991). 
 14    
include a s addition al regressor s measures of  host-coun try investm ent and exchange -rate policie s 
and of the quality of its financial,  legal, and political institutions. 
 
3.3  Summary of Estimation Strategy 
 To summarize our estim ation strategy, our goal  is to  exp lain the v ariation in  imported  
interm ediate inputs acro ss foreign affiliates that ar e in th e sam e industry and that share the sam e 
U.S. parent.  In controlling for parent-by-industry fixed effects, we identify the responsiveness of 
processing imported inputs to trad e costs, wages, tax rates, a nd other factors by exploiting the 
cross-country variation in these variable s.  Our baseline estimating equation is: 
 
m
aipc ic aipc my c mtic ic mm aipc mku
c mus
c ms ipm
aipc
X Yln )t1ln()f 1ln( rln wln wln~s
ε+β+ φ+−γ++τ+γ+γ+γ+γ+α=
 (7) 
where, am ong the new variab les relative to (3), τic is the host-country industry ad valorem  tariff 
rate; fic is the host-country industry ad valorem  freight ra te; tc is the host-coun try co rporate tax 
rate; and X ic are m easures of other host-country and/ or industry policies a nd ch aracteristics.  
Coefficient estim ates from  (7) w ill thus provide insight about the determ inants of vertical 
production n etworks in multinational firm s. 
 
4.  Data Description and Summary Statistics 
4.1  Data Sources 
 The prim ary data  for this project are  for the op erations of  U.S. m ultinationals, bo th of  their  
U.S.-based parents  and  their f oreign affiliates,  as co llected by the  BEA in lega lly m andated 
confidentia l surveys.  An  appendix describes in detail th ese and related non-BEA data. 
                                                                                                                                                             
13 The cutoff  we apply  is an industr y mean of  imported inputs for  further pro cessing as a share o f total sales of gr eater  than  5%. 
 15    
 We use BEA data from its 1994 “benchm ark” su rvey, which covers the entire population of  
U.S. m ultinationa ls in that yea r.  Less data  are collected for minority-owned af filiates, so we use  
the popu lation of m ajority-owned af filiates in m anufacturing , of which there were 6, 955 in 1994  
(out of 8,014 total m anufacturing affiliates link ed to 1,456 U.S. parent enterp rises).  This group 
of m ajority-owned affiliates sp anned 54 m anufacturing ind ustries and 105 host co untries; the 
related grou p of parents has a m edian of four affiliates (with a maximum of 146).  Each affiliate 
is classified in a single industr y of prim ary business based on the distribution of its sales acros s 
industries.  Controlling for parent-industry fixed effects require  us to exclude from  the sam ple 
any affiliates that are the sole affiliate of a parent/industry. 
 For our regression analysis in e quation (7), the dependent variable sis the shar e in tota l 
affiliate cos ts of imports f or further proce ssing  from the United Sta tes (e ither from the U.S. 
parent or f rom another U.S. entity ).14  Total econom ic costs are proxied by total accounting 
revenues  plus inven tory changes.   We use two  affiliate-lev el regressors:  the capital r ental rate 
and output.  Rental rates are defined in the appendix.  Tota l output is m easured as BEA gross 
output (i.e., value added). m
aipc
 Turning to other regressors, we do not obs erve the tru e marginal prices f or labo r  and 
facing each affiliate.  W e approxim ate m arginal prices us ing wage unit values (com pensation 
divided by employm ent) constructed from  the Unite d Nations’ Industrial Statistics Database.  As 
discussed in Section 3.2, for robustne ss we also try other wage m easures. u
cws
cw 
 Our prim ary trade-cost m easures are tariffs , non-tariff barri ers (NTB s), and trans porta tion 
costs; all are bilateral for the ho st country vis a vis the United St ates and all vary by country and 
                                                 
14 The BEA track s imported inputs from both fro m U.S. parents and from non- parent U.S. entities.  Approximately  90-95% of 
imports from the United States by foreign aff iliates of U.S. m ultinationals ar e from  parent firm s.  Even where affilia te im ports 
 16    
industry.  Tariffs and NTBs com e from the United Nations’ TRAINS (Trade Analysis and 
Inform ation System ) database; tran sportation costs were generated from data f iles in Feenstra  
(1996).  Tariffs and transport costs are ad valorem  measures; NTB presence or absence is a 
catego rical measure.  Adjacency to the United St ates is an ad dition al proxy for trade barriers.15 
 The rem aining regres sors captu re addition al host-coun try or ind ustry policies and 
characteristics.  From  the Univers ity of Mi chigan W orld Tax Databa se, we have statutory 
corporate in come tax rates that m easure m aximu m margina l tax rates facing these  businesse s.  
To m easure m arket size in the host-country,  we use Hanson and Xiang’s (2002) m easure of 
market potential:  national GDP plus a distance-weighted sum  of GDP in neighboring countries.  
We include an indicator variable for English as  the prim ary language.  We also include several 
policy-related regressors :  an indicator for the presence of  export-processing zones (EPZs) and 
the value-added tax rate, both fr om PricewaterhouseCoopers; an indicator for whether the host 
country fixes the value of its currency to the U.S. dollar, from Sha mbaugh (2002); and m easures 
of “econom ic freedom ” and of “FDI openness, ” both from  the Heritage Foundation and  Wall  
Street Journal .  Finally,  we include m aterials purchases  as a share of shipm ents in the United  
States for the affiliate’s industry.  This share may reflect the techno logical feasibility of an 
industry to o rganize its constitu ent activ ities into global p roduction networks. 
 For the sam ple used to estim ate our  initia l spec ifications of  equation (7 ), Table 1 reports 
summary statistics for our regressand and severa l regressors.  Relative to the full population of 
6,955 m ajority-owned affiliates in manufacturing, our baseline sam ple is sm aller due to m issing 
host-country data.  This baseline sample spans 39 industries (and is linked with 632 U.S. parents, 
                                                                                                                                                             
come from  an e ntity other than the pa rent, the parent may stil l have arrang ed th e transa ction .  As we discuss la ter, est imation 
results from usin g just imports fr om parents are nearly identical to thos e we repo rt. 
15 In unrepor ted results, we included dis tance from  the Unit ed States to the hos t-coun try as a reg ressor.  Afte r con trolling for 
trans portat ion costs and ad jacency to the United  States, distance was insignifi cant in most specifications. 
 17    
leading to 7 77 parent-in dustry effects) acro ss 42  host countries.  For th e average affiliate in ou r 
sample, 11% of its total costs are accounted f or by im ports of intermediate inputs for further 
processing.  Average host-country/ industry im port tar iff and freight rates are each abo ut 5% (and  
these two variables have a sam ple correlation of 0.22).  The m ean less-skilled wage is just over 
half the valu e of the average m ore-skilled wage. 
 
4.2  Preliminary Evidence  
 Before showing regression results, Table 2 first shows patterns of  vertical production 
networks by broad industry and country groups in our data.  Each  cell of this table reports the 
mean share of i mported inputs for further processing as a share of total revenues. 
 Input processing is m ost prom inent in regions  that have low trade costs and/or low labor 
costs vis a vis the United States.  Mexico is the most obvious exam ple.  It is a low-wage country, 
and in 1994  it benefited  not just from  adjacency to the United States bu t from  the start of lower 
trade b arriers in the NAFTA.  Canada is anoth er exam ple.  W hile a hig h-wage cou ntry, it has  
even lower trade costs than Mexico.  Canada’s  major production centers are located quite near 
industrial regions of the United States, and th e Canadian-A merican Free Trade Agreem ent was  
signed in 1989.  Input pr ocessing  is also relatively com mon in East As ia.  W hile dista nt from the 
United States, the region has m oderate labor costs and open m arkets, at least in certain industries 
such as electronics.  Consistent with theory, poor candidates for input pr ocessing include regions 
with high labor costs and m oderate to high trad e costs (OECD Europe, OECD Asia) and regions 
with relatively closed markets (Other Latin Am erica, with the Mercosur countries of Argentina 
and Brazil; Other Asia, with India,  Africa, and the Middle East). 
 Apart from regional patterns,  certain industries appear to  be good candidates f or input 
process ing.  These include m achinery, transpo rtation equ ipment, and el ectronics, of which the  
 18    
largest sub-industry is com puters.  Several com mon features of these industries m ay make the m 
amenable to global outsourcing.  One is that production tends to involve distinct stages—design, 
component production, final assem bly—that are phys ically separable.  Firm s need not perform  
these tasks in the sam e location, and  so can locate different stages in differe nt countries.  Another 
feature is th at the se pro duction s tages exhib it different f actor intensitie s, with des ign activ ities 
and com ponent production being m ore skill-intens ive and  assembly activities being more labor-
intensive.  To the extent that factor costs va ry across countries, firm s may have an incentive to 
locate labor-intensive activiti es in labor-abundant countries.16 
 In Section 1 , we pointed out that the BEA does not tra ck links in m ultination als’ vertica l 
production networks other than affiliate im ports of inputs for further processing from  U.S.  
entities.  In particular, BEA data do not m easur e affiliate exports of processed inp uts to other 
affiliates o r to their U.S. parent.  In stead, the BEA reports only total affiliate exports.  But if 
affiliates are exporting  mainly processed in termediates,  then our exam ination of affiliate 
imported inputs m ay be augm ented by studying affiliate exp orts as well.  
 Table 3 offers som e initial ev idence on the e xport p atterns of U. S. foreign affiliates.   
Constructed  analogous to Table 2, each cell of th is tab le rep orts affiliate exports to the United 
States as a share of total reve nues.  The pattern of export inte nsity across regions and industries 
is very sim ilar to the pattern of imported-input intensity in the prev ious table.  Export intensity is  
higher in co untries with low trade co sts and /or low wages relative to th e United Sta tes.  For our  
sample of affiliates, the corre lation b etween af filiate im ports of  interm ediate inpu ts from the U.S. 
as a share of  revenue an d affiliate ex ports to the U.S. as a share of  reven ue is 0.59.  Again, Table 
3 measures total affiliate exports, not just affiliate exports of pr ocessed interm ediate inputs, and  
                                                 
16 Note that Table 2 broadly  accor ds with th e introductor y examples in Section 1 of ve rtical production networks.  For example,  
Canadian and Mexican affiliates in tran sportation products have nearly  half of their total sales accounted  for imported  
 19    
so m ay be a noisy  measure of trade flows w ithin U.S. multinationals’ v ertical productio n 
networks.  Still, the st rong patterns of si milarity between Tabl es 2 and 3 suggest that affiliates 
that are m ore oriented towards processing im ported inpu ts are also more orien ted towards  
production for export, as we would expect for a ffiliates that w ere part of such networks. 
 In the regression analysis, to which we turn next, we aim  to uncover which factors drive the 
cross- affiliate varia tion just docum ented.  The m icro-da ta per mit us to control f or variation in th e 
extent to which each p arent chooses to  operate v ertical p roduction networks. 
 
5.  Estimation Results 
5.1  Main Results for Imported-In put Demand 
 Table 4  reports ou r bas eline OLS estim ates of  equation (7).  The de pendent variable is 
imports for further processing as a share of affiliate revenu es.  Colum n 1 excludes additional 
controls, colum n 2 adds in a la rge n umber of such controls, a nd colum n 3 shows our preferred 
specif ication with a n arrow set of  contro ls ch osen from  the precisely  estim ated variab les in 
colum n 2.  All specifica tions include 777 parent-by- industry dumm y variables. 
 There are th ree notab le results in Table 4.  First is the ro le of trade costs , which in this tab le 
are defined as in equation (7) a s the sum  of both ad valorem  tariffs and freight rates.  Im ported 
interm ediate inputs as a share of affiliate revenu es are stron gly ne gatively correlated  with trade 
costs.  Reca ll from Section 3.2 tha t trade costs  are a po tentially im portant determ inant of  the 
price of im ported in termediate inputs  that affiliate s face.  Our estim ates suggest that affiliates do  
in fact respo nd to trad e-cost-induced  changes in imported-in put prices.  The coefficient estim ate 
from  our preferred specif ication in  colum n 3 of Table 4 im plies (f rom equation  (4)) that the own-
price elasticity of de mand for i mported inputs is -3 .28 (standard error of 0. 71):  a 1% fall in input 
                                                                                                                                                             
intermediate inp uts—in con trast with a share of b arely 3% fo r transportation  affiliates in  other Latin  American  countries. 
 20    
prices  due to a reductio n in trade costs leads to a 3.3% in creas e in the quantity of i mported 
interm ediate inputs dem anded by an affiliate.17 
 This sensitivity of input de mand to trade cost s appears consistent with  Yi’s (2003) model in 
which sm all changes in tariffs produce large change s in production costs a nd thus input trade.  
Again, Yi hypothesizes that actu al tariff declines can explain act ual trade growth only if their 
effects are amplified by trade in interm ediate inputs.  Our resu lts accord with this theory. 
 This ev idence also differs from previous em pirical work  on m ultinationa ls (e.g., Car r, et al, 
2001), which finds that foreign-a ffiliate sales are higher the highe r are host-country tariffs and 
transportation costs.  O ur evid ence suggests a m ore-nuanced st ory, in which at least one 
important af filiate activity—process ing im ported interm ediates—is inh ibited, not en couraged, by 
higher trade barriers.  The net im pact of  trad e bar riers on tota l FDI  is like ly to vary a cross 
affiliates with the scope and size of their d ifferent productive activ ities. 
 A second notable find ing in Table 4 is th e sensitiv ity of input pro cessing to labo r costs.   
Imported-input dem and is decr easing in host-country w ages for less-skilled w orkers and 
incre asing in host-coun try wages f or more-skilled worker s, with all coef ficients precis ely 
estim ated.  The estim ates from colum n 3 of Ta ble 4 im ply (from equation (5)) that the cross-
price wage elasticities of de mand for im ported i nputs are –0.32 (standard error of 0.09) for less-
skilled labor and 0.36 (standard e rror of 0.09) for m ore-skilled la bor.  A 1% f all in less-sk illed 
(more-skilled) wages leads to about  a 1/3% increase (d ecrease) in im ported interm ediate inputs. 
 This responsiveness of input  processing to w ages is at odds  with much of the earlier 
empirical w ork on m ultinationals  that uses agg regate data (e.g., Brain ard, 1997; M arkusen and  
Maskus, 1999; Blonigen et al, 2002).  Consistent w ith models of vertical FDI, we find tha t 
foreign affiliates do m ore processing of i mports the lower are  low-skilled wages rela tive to high-
                                                 
17 Standard  errors  for el asticities are calculated using the  Delta method. 
 21    
skilled wages.  This accords with our intuition th at im ports for further processing and less-sk illed 
labor are complem ents.  That we  find stronger evidence of vertical FDI than previous literature 
may be due to our use of m icro-level data on forei gn affiliates.  Previou s work, in contrast, uses 
data that ag gregates not just ac ross the ac tivities of a given  affiliate but also  acro ss all af filiate s 
in a given industry and country.  Our data sugg est multinationals vary in the range of activities 
they perform and therefore m ay display both vert ical and ho rizon tal production ch aracteris tics. 
 The third notable result of Table 4 is the im portant role played by ot her host-country policies 
and charac teristics.  In o ur pref erred colum n (3), im ported-in put dem and is sign ificantly (a t the 
10% level) higher in countri es with lower corpo rate tax ra tes.  Th is role f or tax rates is consisten t 
with evidence (e.g., Hanson, 2001) that m any govern ments give tax breaks to foreign fir ms that 
engage in export processi ng within their borders—an activity th at involves vertically specialized 
affiliates that im port large am ounts of inputs.  Many studies have exam ined how taxes affect 
aggregate F DI (Hines, 2 001), but no t on how  they affect the com position of FDI.18 
 Dem and for im ported interm ediate inputs  is higher for affiliates  in Canada o r Mexico, 
consistent w ith these co untries enjoying lower trade cos ts with U.S. f irms due to a com bination 
of geographic proxim ity and preferential m arket access.  Input dem and is also significan tly 
higher in h ost coun tries with EPZ s.  EPZs ty pically offer a range of incentives to prom ote 
exports, including tax holidays, expedited transi t of goods through custom s, and tariff breaks on  
imported equipm ent, which m ay induce firm s to concentrate input p rocess ing in  affiliates.19  
Affiliate reliance on im ported intermediate inpu ts is lower in countries  situated in regions with  
                                                 
18 In Section 3.2 we discussed con cerns about transfer pricing.  If transfer pric ing were dominating  the variation in our data, th en 
we would expect to see the opposite correla tion between host-countr y tax rat es and im ported-in put intensit y.  If multinationals  
were simply  shifting profits to low-tax count ries via input trad e, then affiliates in these low-tax locations would be charged a 
below-market pr ice for inputs.  Holding a ffiliate output constant , this practice w ould gener ate lo w values for ou r dependen t 
variab le in low-tax locations, the opposite correlation from that actually  revealed in  our pr eferr ed specifications. 
 22    
large r market poten tial.  This is  consistent  with horizontal theo ries of  FDI, in which 
multinationa ls located in  markets with la rger local dem and ar e more orie nted toward s integra ted 
production (perhaps for local consum ers) and le ss oriented towards operating via vertical 
production networks.  Affiliate reliance on imported inputs is h igher in host cou ntries with  
higher levels of economic freedom .  One interpre tation is that poor governance of the econom y is 
especially dam aging to firm s engaged in hi gh levels of input im porting and exporting. 
 The rem aining reg ressors in  Table 4 hav e generally ins ignifican t coefficient estim ates.  
Though insignificant, the estim ates for NTBs are pu zzling:  imported interm ediates as a share of 
affiliate reve nues are po sitively co rrelated with NTBs .  To the extent tha t NTBs are tr ade bar riers 
that raise im port prices, the oppos ite correlation m ight be expect ed.  Data problem s may matter 
here.  NTBs  do not m easure whether quantitative restrictions on trade bind, but rather whether 
governm ents have the option of im posing them . 
 
5.2  Additional Results and Robust ness Checks for Imported-Input Demand 
 Table 5 applies alternative estim ators to our pr eferred sp ecification in Table 4.  Colu mn (1)  
uses Tobit rather than OLS.  In or der to obt ain consisten t coefficient estim ates (W ooldridge, 
2002), we needed to reduce the number of fixed e ffects in the specification from a full set of 
parent-industry controls to a set of two-digit indust ry controls.  Most coefficient estim ates retain  
the sam e sign and pattern of significance—e.g.,  on trade co sts and wag es.  The co efficient on  
capital is still pos itive but has bec ome signifi cantly so.  This accords with the  presum ed 
complementarity between input pro cessing and less-skill ed labor discussed a bove, as there is 
substantia l evidence in labor econo mics that ca pital and les s-skilled lab or are pr ice substitute s.  
                                                                                                                                                             
19 A standard feature of EPZs is tariff br eaks on inputs imported from abroad (for input s used to p roduce expor ts).  One might 
expect, th en, th at tar iffs would have no impact on imported i nputs in countries with EPZs.  In unreported regressions we 
interacted the EPZ variable with trade costs to capture this effect but found the interactions to  be insignificant. 
 23    
The coefficient estim ate for output changes both  sign and significance.  As discussed in Section  
2, there are concerns about the s ensitiv ity of T obit es timates to the included fix ed effects.  
Nevertheless, the broad patterns appear  match th ose of the OLS estim ates. 
 The second colum n of Table 5 re-estim ates our  preferred specification where we replace our 
parent-industry dumm y variab les with a full set of country dumm y variables.  The cost of these 
country controls is the need to exclude all regres sors that vary by country only.  The  benefit is 
that this checks whether estim ates for the key trade-cost regr essor are driven by unobserved, 
country-specific factors.  The coeffi cient on trad e costs is som ewhat sm aller in absolute value 
that in o ther specif ications but rem ains sta tistically sign ificant.   The  implied own-pr ice elasticity 
from  this co untry fixed-effects estim ate is -2.82 (standard error of 0.97). 
 The third co lumn of Table 5 us es an  instrum ental variab les (IV) es timator.  It is com monly 
asser ted tha t multination als have a large say in  trade -policy  formulation  in host cou ntries (e.g., 
Blonigen and Figlio, 1998)—especially sm all devel oping countries.  If this  were the case, then 
our negative correlation between trade costs a nd im ported-input shares might reflect not the  
response of firm s to exogenously given trade cost s but rather the politic al-econom y outcom e of 
firms with vertical p roduction networks lobby ing successfully for low  tariffs.  To address this  
possibility we re-es timate our p referred sp ecifica tion instru menting f or trade costs  with tariffs 
from  1989, five years before our sample.  Thes e earlier-period tariffs ar e valid instrum ents if 
they are co rrelated with current trade costs y et are uncorrelated with the disturbance term .  
Intuitively, we find it plausib le that affiliate operations in 1994 have weak political-economy 
links with 1989 tariffs.  Our IV estim ates are qualitatively unchanged f rom the OLS estim ates, 
with the co efficient on trade cost s rem aining significantly negative.20 
                                                 
20 An ex ante  argument for disco unting th e endo geneity  concern may be that actual estim ation  sample does not  contain  (due to 
data l imitations discussed in Sec tion 4.1) many very small coun tries where pol itical influ ence of  multination als is likel y to b e 
 24    
 Beyond wha t is reported in Table 4 and 5, we conducted a large num ber of other robustness 
checks.  One set of checks involved alternative m easures of key regressors and our regressand.  
We constructed industry tariffs a nd transportation costs using sim ple arithm etic rather than trade-
weighted av erages.  W e replaced statuto ry corp orate tax rates with effective av erage corporate 
tax rates, reported in G rubert ( 2001) as constructed by the IRS Sta tistics of Incom e Division 
from tax r eturns of  U.S. m ultinatio nals.  W e measured wages us ing af filiate  data on av erage 
annual salaries for production (less-skilled) and non-production (m ore-sk illed) worker s (either 
for a given affiliate or for other affiliates in the sam e industry and c ountry).  And we also 
measured our regressand using i nputs im ported from  U.S. parent s only, excluding imports from 
unaffiliated U.S. third parties (se e also note 14) .  Our estim ation re sults were qualitatively 
unchanged by these and other m easurem ent choices. 
 A second set of robustness check s involved sample restrictions .  One was to exclude from 
our sam ple all af filiates in Mex ico or Canada, to ensure that our findings were not driven by 
intra-NAFTA trade patterns.  A second was to exclude affiliates  facing very  high host-
country/industry tariffs.  One m ight worry that the negative co rrelation between trade costs and 
imported-in put intensity  reflects tax evasion :  in the face of high tariffs, firms might under-report 
the value of i mported inputs to lower tax liabili ties.  For China-Hong Kong trade, Fism an and 
Wei (2001) find evidence of under-invoicing, but only at high tariff rates (i .e., above 35%).  We  
tried elim inating all observations of tariffs above  various cut-offs, down t o 20%.  Our estim ation 
results were also qualitatively unchange d by these and other sam pling choices. 
                                                                                                                                                             
strongest.  The instruments used  were three measures of 1989  industr y-coun try tariffs, each of wh ich used a different weightin g 
scheme for aggregating th e raw tariff  data (s ee Da ta Appen dix for d etails).  Th e correl ation betwe en trade  costs and  our 
instruments is quite high :  a regression of trad e costs on the in struments obtained an R-squar ed of 0.60.  We also note that 
instrumenting fo r trade costs may addres s measurem ent-error b ias.  Our anal ysis as form alized in  equat ion (7) as sumes that an  
affiliate classified in industr y X based on th e composition of its sales im ports in puts in that sam e industr y X.  In  princip le, this 
assumption need  not be true:  an industr y-X aff iliate may  import inputs from an other i ndustr y Y.  In p ractice, th e BEA has no  
 25    
 
5.3  Export Behavior and the Determinan ts of Vertical Production Netw orks 
 Consisten t with theor ies of vertical FDI, we  saw in Section 4.2 that af filiates with greate r 
reliance on imported interm ediate in puts also tend to be m ore expor t-intensive.  Given this, we 
can gain add itional insight on vertical production  networks b y exam ining export in tensity.  In the 
presence of vertical production networks, we would expect affiliate im ports of inputs and 
affiliate exp orts to resp ond sim ilarly to trad e cost s, factor prices, and ot her variab les.  To see 
whether this  is the case, we replace the reg ressan d s in equatio n (7) with th e shar e of affiliate 
exports to the United S tates in a ffiliate revenues.  Tabl e 6 reports these final estim ation results.  
The five specifications are our baseline and pref erred OLS specifications from  Table 4, and the 
Tobit, country fixed-effect, and IV specifications from  Table 5. m
aipc
 Com paring colum ns 1 a nd 2 of Table 6 with co lumns 1 and 3 of Table 4, we see that every 
coefficient estim ate except that on capital costs retains the sa me sign and of ten the sam e pattern 
of statis tical sign ifican ce.  Like imported-inp ut intensity,  affiliate U .S.-export intensity is 
negatively correlated with host-c ountry trade co sts, less-sk illed wages, and corporate taxes (in 
colum n 2), and positively correlated with hi gh-skilled wages and th e exis tence of EPZs. 
Com paring colum ns 3, 4, and 5 of Table 6 with colum ns 1, 2, and 3 of Table 5, we again see  
similar sign  patte rns an d mostly sim ilar patte rns of statistical s ignificance.  In particular, trade  
costs are statistically sign ificant for two of these three alternative sp ecifications. 
 These resu lts suggest th at where affiliates are more specialized in pro cessing inpu ts imported  
from  the United S tates, they also export a higher fraction of their output to the U nited S tates.  
Lower trad e costs, lower wages f or les s-skilled labor, and lower corpor ate tax rates are all  
                                                                                                                                                             
inform ation on t he industr y com position of im ported inputs for fu rther processing.  Note that be cause equation (7) conditions o ur 
analysis on affiliate output , we do not f ace measurement e rror du e to us ing nom inal rather than  effective rates of protection. 
 26    
associated with stronger export orientation, just as they are associated with stronger im port 
intens ity.  W hile the d ata do not p ermit us to s ay explicitly  that th e exp orts af filiate s send to th e 
United States are processed inputs imported from the United States, the results are consisten t 
with this interpre tation a nd with the genera l conclusion that vertical pr oduction networks shape 
trade p atterns between U.S. parents a nd their f oreign af filiates . 
 
6.  Conclusion 
 Distinguishing features of th e most recent w ave of globaliz ation have been the rise of  
multinational firm s and of trade in  interm ediate inputs.  In this  paper, we have ex amined the 
forces behind both these new developm ents by an alyzing im ports of inputs for further processing 
from  U.S. multinational parents by their affiliates in foreign countries.  These shipm ents of 
interm ediate inputs prov ide a direct m easure of vertical pro duction networks in multin ation als.  
Theory suggests that affiliate input processing depends on influences s uch as trade costs and  
factor prices.  Our results  support this prediction. 
 Among our  main findings are that affiliate de mand for i mported inp uts is higher is host 
countries w ith lower trade costs, lower wages for less-skilled labor (in absolu te term s and 
relative to wages f or more skilled  labor ), and  lower corp orate income tax rat es.  De mand fo r 
inputs is also affected by other host-country pol icies and characteristics,  including the presence 
of export-processing zo nes and the size of the h ost-coun try m arket.   Exports by affiliates exh ibit 
similar patterns of correlation with trad e costs, w ages, and other variables. 
 Our finding of a high elasticity  for trade costs  is consis tent with Yi (20 03), who shows how 
trade in inp uts allows s mall changes in tarif fs to produce large changes in trade flows.  Our 
findings con trast with  much ear lier e mpirica l work on m ultinationa ls, wh ich tended to f ind tha t 
the scale of activ ities by  foreign a ffiliates of U.S. parent firms is larger in  countries w ith high er 
 27    
wages and higher tr ade c osts vis a vis the United  States.  Our results sugg est that m ultinationals 
tailor their foreign operations  to lo cal m arket conditions.  They appear to  focus affiliates  on 
processing imported inputs in count ries where wages and trade costs are lower and m arkets are  
smaller; and they appear to focus affiliates on production for local consum ers in countries where  
wages and trade costs are hi gher and m arkets are larger. 
 Our results also indicate that other host-coun try policies shape verti cal production networks, 
sometimes in unexpected ways.  Lower tax rates on corpo rate in come are associated with greater 
affiliate inp ut process ing.  W hile both theory  and em pirical work have shown that lowe r 
corporate taxes in a country are generally associ ated with greater FDI inflows, there has been 
little work o n whether ta xes af fect how m ultinationals organ ize their f oreign operation s.   
 One final point is to re-empha size w hat our analysis does and does not reveal about vertical 
production networks in  multination al firm s.  W e have focused on the decision s of these firms 
conditional on having a particular netw ork of foreign affiliates.  It would  be interes ting to extend  
this focus to  the intertemporal decision of  estab lishing and/or closing foreign affiliates , but that i s 
beyond the scope of this paper.  It would also  be interesting to st udy vertical production 
networks in inte r-firm arm’s-length transac tions.  As we discussed, by construction the BEA data 
do not tra ck such a ctivities.  Bu t to the ex tent that thes e inter -firm dimensions of networks  
respond to the sam e incentives we have identif ied, our findings m ay apply m ore broadly. 
 28    
Data Appendix 
 
BEA Data 
 
The BEA data com e from  legally m andated confidential surveys it conducts.  A U.S.  
multinationa l consis ts of one U.S. parent plus on e or m ore foreign af filiates.  A parent is a U.S. 
legal entity,  such as a corporation, that genera lly contro ls a business en terpr ise loca ted in the  
United Sta tes and tha t has at leas t one foreign a ffiliate.  A f oreign af filiate is a f oreign business 
enterprise (incorporated or  unincorp orated ) in which the re is U.S. direct investm ent; that is, it is a  
foreign business enterp rise in whic h the U.S. parent has at leas t a 10-percent equity stake.21  
Firm s responding to BEA surveys are instructed to denom inate revenues and costs in U.S. dollars 
that are, for the m ost part, valued in the prices  and exchan ge rates of the year cov ered by th e 
data. 
 
Industry of Affiliate :  Each af filiate is classif ied in a s ingle industry of  primary business based  on 
the distribution of sales across i ndustries that it is required to report.  For our 1994 data, the BEA 
uses an internal industry defini tion, the BEA Interna tional Surveys Industry (ISI) codes, which 
are closely related to the 1987 3-digit U.S. Sta ndard Industrial Classification (SIC) codes.  A 
foreign af filiate gen erally repr esents the conso lidation of  the U.S. direct inve stor’s busines s 
operations in a host country in a single three-digit industry.22 
 
Imported Intermediate Input s for Further Processing :  Our m easure of i mported inputs for 
further processing capture im ports both from  pare nt and non-parent U.S. en tities.  Approxim ately 
90-95% of  these im ports are f rom parent f irms.  Even where af filiate imports com e from an 
entity other than the par ent, the par ent may still h ave arr anged the tran saction.  W ith this in m ind, 
the m easure of  affiliate im ports we use is a ll U.S. im ports, includ ing im ports f rom parent and  
non-parent entities.  Estim ation results using just  imports from  parents are nearly identical to 
those we report.  For affiliates belonging to sm all U.S. parents, the BEA i mputes im ports for 
further processing us ing data on to tal affiliate imports.  Our resu lts ar e robust to alternative 
imputation m ethods and to dropping  affiliates with im puted data from  the sam ple. 
 
Wages :  Ma nufacturing af filiates  are required by  the BEA to  repor t wag e bills and e mploym ent 
separately f or non-production and production worker s, a breakdown that tends to separate m ore-
skilled from less-sk illed workers.  For each a ffiliate we construct wage unit valu es for non-
production and production workers .  In unrep orted results, we use these own-affiliate wage 
measures and also cons truct “ou tside” wage m easures defin ed for each affiliate a s the averag e 
wage paid by all other af filiates in the sam e country and in dustry.  These outside wages m ay 
address th e potential pro blem of endogeneity in af filiate -level wages, in that variation  in af filiate 
wages m ay reflect variation both in true prices fo r given labor quality and in labor qua lity its elf. 
 
                                                 
21 In this p aper, we use th e term affiliate or fore ign affil iate to refer to th is class of enterpr ises.  Not e that in the BE A dat a each 
affiliate is a business enterpri se–differen t from other micro  data  sets on  establishments, e.g ., the U.S. Longitud inal Resear ch 
Database .  Enterprises m ay oper ate any num ber of estab lishm ents, inform ation that the B EA does no t track. 
22 The only  exception to this rule is that  foreign affiliates in  the sa me host countr y, but in d ifferent three-dig it industries, may be 
consolidat ed if t hey are integr al parts of the same business oper ation. 
 29    
Rental Price of Capital :  The renta l rate of  capita l is def ined as an a ffiliate' s return to capital 
(value added less em ployee com pensation) over its fixed capital stock (net  property, plant, and 
equipm ent) averaged over the 1985-1994 period (o r, for affi liates established after 1985, fro m 
the affiliate’s birth to 1 994).   Rental rates fo r a single year are highly  volatile, an d averaging 
over tim e helps sm ooth this series .  In unreported regressions, e ndogeneity concerns lead us to 
try as an alternative m easure th e rental retu rn to capital calculated for other affiliates in the sam e 
country and industry.  R esults for this m easur e are very sim ilar to those that we report. 
 
Non-BEA Data 
 
Wages :  Using data from the UNIDO Industry Data base for 1994, we m easure the unskilled 
wage as the average an nual salary per worker in  that country’s apparel sector, which in m ost 
countries is the lowest-wage m anufacturing indus try.  We m easure the skilled wage as the 
average annual salary per worker  in a country’s chem ical, electronics, and electrical m achinery 
industries, w hich in m ost countries are the hi ghest-wage, m ost skill-intensive industries. 
 
Trade Barriers :  Tar iffs are f rom the United  Nations’ TRAINS (Trade  Analysis  and Information  
System ) CD-ROM.  The original source data  are classified by c ountry and by 6-digit 
Harm onized System product codes.23  Aggregation of the data from  a 4-digit SIC basis to an ISI 
basis was obtained by weighting th e disaggregated data by the value of U. S. exports to th e 
country.  Data on NTBs also com e from TRAINS.  The original source data for these were at the 
4-digit SIC level, which we then concorded to  BEA industries as just described.  This  
inform ation is categorical, indicating presen ce or absence of NTBs tracked by TRAINS. 
 
The tran sportation-cost data we re generated from  data files in Feenstra (1996 ). For each  
observation we constructed transpor tation cos ts as charges fo r insuran ce and freight as a share of 
the custom s value of im ports.  The original source data are classified on  a 4-digit 1987 SIC basis; 
they were aggregated to  an IS I bas is by weigh ting the disaggregated data by the value of total 
U.S. exports to the host country.  (We use export s and not im ports to we ight 4-digit transport 
costs since the freight rates we require are those th at apply to inputs that the U.S. parent exports 
to its affiliates in a given country.  Results usin g U.S. i mports as weigh ts to constru ct tran sport 
costs a re very similar to those tha t we report. ) 
 
Other Varia bles:  From  PriceW aterhouseCoopers, we use an  indicator for the presence of export-
processing zones (EPZ s) that ca ptures a range of hos t-country export incen tives.  Using data 
from  Shambaugh (2002), we also construct an i ndicator for whether the host country fixes the 
value of its curren cy to the U.S. dollar.  Recen t research (e.g. , Frankel an d Rose, 200 2) finds th at 
bilateral trade is stim ulated by cu rrency unions ; we generalize from  this evid ence to exam ine 
whether host-country exchange-rate policy m atters along the m ore-general fixed-versus-float 
margin.  A final policy regressor is a collec tion of “econom ic freedom ” measures collected by 
the Heritage Foundation and The Wall Street Journal .  We average country index scores for 
respect for property rights, exte nt of government regulation, and prevalence of black-m arket 
activ ities, with highe r scores ind icating less econ omic freedom. 
                                                 
23 These data, plus  a translation  of them to a 1987  4-digit U .S. SIC b asis were  obtain ed from Jon Hav eman. 
 30    
Refer ences 
Adel man, M orris A.  1955.  “Concept and Statistic al Measurement of Vertical  Integration,” in Business 
Concentratio n and Price Policy .  Princeton:  Princeton University  Press and NB ER. 
 
Barba Navaretti, Giorgio, Jan I. Haaland, and Anthon y Venables.  2002.  “Multin ational Corporations and  
Global Prod uction Networks:  The I mplications for Trade Policy .”  CEPR Report prepared for th e 
European Commis sion Directorate G eneral for Trade. 
 
Blonigen, Bruce A., and David N. Fig lio.  1998.  “Voting for Prot ection:  Does Direct Foreig n Investm ent 
Influence Legislator Behavior?”  Americ an Economic Review , 88(4), Septem ber, pp. 1 002-1014. 
 
Blonigen, Bruce A., Ronald B. Davies, and Keith Head.  2002.  “Estimatin g the Knowledge Capital 
Model of the Multinational  Enterprise:  Comment.”  NBER Working Paper No. 8929. 
 
Bordo, Mich ael, Barry  Eichengreen, and Douglas I rwin. 1999 . “Is Globalization Toda y Really Different 
from Globalization a Hundred Years Ago?” in  Dani Rodrik and Susan Collins (eds.) Brookings Trad e 
Forum 1999 , pp. 1-50. 
 
Borga, Maria and William Zeile.  2 002.  "F oreign Outsourci ng and the Intrafirm  Trade of U.S. 
Multinational  Com panies."  Mimeo, U.S. Bureau of E conom ic An alysis. 
 
Brainard, Lael.  1997.  “ An Em pirical Assessment  of the Proxi mity-Concent ration Tradeoff between  
Multinational  Sales and Trade.”  Ameri can Economic Review 87:  520-54 4. 
 
Cam pa, Jose, and Linda Goldberg. 19 97. “The Evolvin g External Orientation of Manufacturing:  a Profile 
of Four Co untries.”  Federal Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy Review , July, pp . 53–81 . 
 
Carr, David L., Jam es R. Markusen, and Keith E.  Maskus. 200 1. “Estim ating the Knowledge-Capital 
Model of the Multinational  Enterprise.”  American Economic Review , 91, p p. 693-708. 
 
Clausing, Kim berly A.  2001.  “The Im pact of Transf er Pricing on Intrafirm Trade.”  In Jam es R. Hines 
(ed.) Internat ional T axation and Multinational Activity . Chicago:  University  of Chicago Press. 
 
Council on F oreign Relations.  20 02.  America—Sti ll Unprepared, Still i n Danger .  New York:  Counc il 
on Foreig n Relations. 
 
Diewert, W. Erwin. 1974. “Applications of Duality Theor y,” in M. Intriligator and D. Kendrick (eds.) 
Frontiers of Quantitative Economics  Volum e II, Amsterdam : North-Holland, p p. 106- 171. 
 
Ekholm , Karolina, Rikard  Forslid, and  James R. Mar kusen.  20 03.  “Exp ort-Platform  Foreign Direct 
Investm ent.”  National Bureau of Ec onomic Research  Workin g Pap er No. 9517 . 
 
Feenstra, Robert C. 1996. “U.S. Im ports:  Data  and Concordances.” N ational Bureau of Econom ic 
Research Working Paper # 5515 , plus data CD-ROM ( http://www.nber.org ). 
 
Feenstra, Robert C. 1 998. “The Integra tion of Trade  and t he Disintegration of Prod uction.”   Journ al of 
Economic Perspectives , Vol.12 ( 4), Fall , pp. 31-50. 
 
 31    
Feenstra, Robert C., and Gordon H. Hanson.  2002.   “Global Production Shari ng and Rising Inequalit y:  
A Surve y of Trade and Wages.” In Ja mes Harri gan, ed., Handbo ok of  Internation al Trade , Basil  
Blackwell, fo rthcom ing. 
 
Feinberg, Susan E., and Michael P. Keane.  2001.   “U.S.-Canada Trade Liberalizatio n and MNC 
Production  Location.”  Review of Economics and St atistics , 83(1) , Februar y, pp. 118-132. 
 
Fism an, Ray mond, and Shang-Jin Wei.  200 1.  “Tax Rates and Tax Evasion:   Evidence from  ‘Missing 
Imports’  in C hina.  National Bureau of  Econom ic Resear ch Worki ng Paper No. 8551. 
 
Frankel, Jeffrey , and Andr ew Ro se. 2002. “An Estimate of the Effect of Co mmon Currencies on Trade 
and Incom e.” Quarterly Jo urnal of Eco nomics, 117, p p. 437-466. 
 
Grossman, Gene and Elhanan Help man.  2002a.  “Outsourcing in  a Global Econom y.”  National Bureau 
of Econom ic Research Working Paper No. 872 8. 
 
Grossman, Gene and Elhanan Help man.  2002 b.  “Managerial Incentives and the International 
Organization of Producti on.”  National Bureau of Econom ic Research Working  Paper No. 940 3. 
 
Grubert, Harry.  2001.  “T ax Planning by Com panies and Tax Com petition by  Governm ents:  Is There 
Evidence of Changes in B ehavior? ”  In Ja mes R. Hines, Jr. (ed.) International T axation and Multinational  
Activity , Chic ago:  University of Chicago Press, forthco ming. 
 
Grubert, Harry, and J. Mutti. 1991. “Taxes, Tariffs,  and Transfer Pricing in Multinational  Corporation 
Decision Making.”  Review of Economi cs and Stat istics  17, pp.  285-293. 
 
Hanson, Gordon H.   2001.  “Sh ould Foreign Co untries Prom ote Foreign D irect Investment?”  G-2 4 
Discussion Paper Series, No. 9. 
 
Hanson, Gordon H., Raym ond J. Matal oni, Jr., and Matthew J. Slaughter .  2001.  “Expan sion Strategies 
of U.S. Multi national Firms,” in D. Rodrik and S. Col lins (eds.) Brookings Trad e Forum , pp. 245-2 94. 
 
Hanson, Gordon H. and Chong Xiang.  2002.  “The Home-Mark et Effect and Bilateral Trade Patterns.”  
NBER Working Paper No. 9076 . 
 
Haskel, Jonathan E., Soni a Pereira, and Matthew J. Slaughter.  2002 .  “Does Inward Foreign Direct 
Investm ent Boost the Prod uctivit y of Domes tic Firms?” NBER Working  Paper  No.872 4. 
 
Help man, Elhanan. 1984.  “A Sim ple Theor y of Trade with Mu ltinational Corporations.”   Journal of 
Political Economy , 92, pp. 451-4 71. 
 
Help man, Elhanan, and Paul R. Krug man. 1985 . Market Structure and Foreign Trade .  Cambridge, MA:   
MIT Press. 
 
Help man, Elhanan, Marc Melitz, and Stephen R. Yeaple.  2003.  “Exports  versus FDI.”  National Bureau 
of Econom ic Research Working Paper No. 943 9. 
 
Hines, Jam es R. (ed.).  2001.  Internati onal Taxati on and Multinational Activity .  Chicago: University  of 
Chicago Press. 
 
 32    
Hummels, David, Jun Ishii,  and Kei-Mu Yi.  2001.  “The  Nature and Growth of Vertical Specialization in  
World Trade.”  Journal of Internationa l Economics , Vol. 54, pp. 75-96. 
 
Kohli, Ulrich  R. 19 78. “A Gross National Produc t Function  and the Derived Demand for Imports and  
Suppl y of Ex ports.” Cana dian Jo urnal of Economics,  11, pp. 167- 82. 
 
Kohli, Ulrich R. 1991 . Technology, Duality and F oreign Trade, London:   Harvester Whetsheaf. 
 
Kumar, Nagesh. 1994.  “Determ inants of Exp ort Orientation of Forei gn Prod uction b y U.S.  
Multinational s:  An Inter-Countr y Anal ysis.”  Journal of International Business Studies  (1), pp. 141-156. 
 
Markusen, James R. 2002.  Multination al Firms and the Theory of Internationa l Trade .  Cambridge, MA:   
MIT Press. 
 
Markusen, James R. and Keith Masku s.  1999.  “D iscriminating am ong Alternative Theories of the 
Multinational  Enterprise.”  National Bureau of Economic Research  Working Paper No. 7164. 
 
Markusen, Jam es R. and Keith Maskus.  2001.  “Multinati onal Firm s:  Reconciling Theor y and 
Evidence.”  In Magnus Bl omstro m and Linda Gold berg (eds.) Topics in Inte rnationa l Economics:  A 
Festschrift in Honor of Robert E. Lipsey .  Chicago:  University  of Chicago Press, pp. 71-95. 
 
Markusen, James R., and  Anthon y Venables. 2000. “T he Theor y of Endo wment, Intra-Industr y and  
Multinational  Trade.”  Journal of Intern ationa l Econ omics , 52, pp . 209- 234. 
 
Sansing, Richard. 19 99.  “Relationship-Specific Investments and the Transfer Pricing Paradox.”  Review 
of Accountin g Studies , 4, pp. 119-134. 
 
Sham baugh, Jay C.  2 002. “The Effects of Fixe d Exc hange Rates on Mo netary  Policy.”  Mi meo. 
 
Shatz, Howard J.  2000.   “U.S. Multinational E xports From  Dev eloping Countries.”  Chapter 3 in The 
Location of U.S. Multinati onal Affili ates.  Harvard University  Ph.D. Dissert ation. 
 
Slaughter, Matthew J.  2000. “Produc tion Transfer Within Mul tinational Enterprises and  Am erican 
Wages,” Journal of I nterna tional Eco nomics, 50, April, pp. 449-472. 
 
U.S. Bureau of Econom ic Analy sis. 20 02.  U.S. Direct Investment Abroad: Preliminary Resu lts From the 
1999 Benchmark Survey . Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office. 
 
Wooldridge, Jeffrey  M.  2002.  Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and  Panel Data .  Cam bridge:   
MIT Press. 
 
Yeaple, Step hen R.  2001.  “The Deter minants of U.S. Outward Foreign Direct Invest ment:  Market 
Acce ss versu s Comparativ e Advantage.”  Mi meo, University  of Penns ylvania. 
 
Yeats, Alexander J. 200 1. “Just How Big is Global Production  Sharing?” in  Sven W. Arnd t and Henry k 
Kierzkowski (eds.), Fragmentation:  New Production  Patterns in the W orld Economy , Oxford:  Oxford  
University  Press. 
 
Yi, Kei-Mu. 2003 . “Can Vertical Sp ecialization Explain the Growth of World Trade?” Journal o f 
Political Economy , 111( 1), pp. 52-10 2. 
 33    
 
Table 1:  Summary Statistics 
Variable Mean (s.d.) 
Imported-Input Share 0.110 
 (0.176) 
More-Skilled W ages 28.631 
($, Thousands) (17.089) 
Less-Skilled W ages 14.811 
($, Thousands) (7.897) 
Tariff Rate 0.054 
(ad valorem) (0.051) 
Transportation Costs 0.045 
(ad valorem) (0.038) 
Trade Costs 0.099 
(ad valorem) (0.071) 
Corporate T ax Rate 0.344 
 (0.056) 
Adjacent to United States 0.176 
 (0.380) 
English Speaking 0.317 
 (0.465) 
No. Observations 4,102 
 
Notes :  Ea ch ce ll reports  the variable mean and , in par enthes es, its standard de viation .  Thes e statistics are for  the 
sample  used in the  baseline estimates reporte d in Ta ble 4; the  year of the se data is 1994.   See text for de tails on varia ble 
definitions and  construction . 
 
Source :  Authors ’ calculations  using data from th e U.S. Bur eau of Economic An alysis and oth er sou rces. 
 34    
 
 
Table 2:  Affiliate Im ported Intermediate Inputs, by Industry and Region, 1994 
                      
Region           CanadaMexico Other OECD OECD East Other Africa Middle World
Industry     Lat.Am .Europe Asia Asia Asia   East   
           
Chemicals
            
          
           
           
           
          
           
          
          
           
           
           18.92 12.35 9.44 4.90 9.87 15.51 8.57 -- -- 7.62
Metals 19.23 23.13 -- -- 7.88 13.79 -- 15.51 4.14 8.24
Machinery
 37.19 44.24 9.95 8.20 7.42 8.62 6.06 4.79 10.98 10.98
Electronics
 20.16 40.82 21.14 9.83 17.89 26.98 1.49 13.34 4.39 17.44
Transportation  
 50.36 45.67 3.36 2.33 5.11 6.21 -- -- -- 21.39 
Other Mfg
 18.15 13.29 -- -- 11.82 7.27 -- 2.33 8.89 8.89
Total 38.66 36.70 8.45 5.64 10.41 15.24 4.46 11.79 4.48 13.59
 
Notes :  This table shows means by two-digit ind ustry and geogr aphic region of the shar e of imp orted inputs for further processin g in total revenu es for foreign  
affiliates of U.S.  multinat ional  enterprises.   Means  are we ighted  by affil iate total revenue.   The “Other Europ e” region is exc luded fr om the tab le due to disclosur e 
restrictions (ther e are few aff iliates per industr y in the r egion).  The same appl ies to entr ies th at read, “--.”  Th e sample i s 4,285 majority -owned fo reign aff iliates 
of U.S. m ultinationals th at belong to a parent that has as least two foreign affi liates.  The year is 1994. 
 
Source :  Authors ’ calculations using data from th e U.S. Bu reau of Economic An alysis. 
 35    
 
 
Table 3:  Affiliate Exports to the Un ited States, by Industry and Region, 1994 
                
Region Canada       Mexico Othe r OECD OECD East World
Industry     Lat.Am .Europe Asia Asia   
        
Chemicals
         
       
        
        
        
       
        
       
        
       
        
        
        18.96 2.05 2.71 3.64 2.76 0.77 4.82
Metals 40.86 11.76 5.71 3.44 2.73 6.19 10.29
Machinery
 -- 29.32 17.60 7.63 -- 52.72 20.19
Electronics
 24.04 53.76 -- 6.14 5.52 26.55 16.16
Transportation
 61.40 54.80 2.33 4.10 1.73 6.80 26.45
Other Mfg
 26.96 13.64 5.24 4.01 3.02 4.36 6.95
Total 47.91 40.84 6.18 4.90 6.62 32.85 16.05
 
Notes :  This table shows means b y two-digit indu stry and geogr aphic region of the share of exports to the United States  
in tot al revenues for fore ign aff iliates of  U.S. multination al enterprises.   Me ans are w eighted by affiliate total sales.   
Four regions ar e excluded  from the table du e to disclosure r estrictions ( there are few affiliates  per industr y in the 
region):  Other Europe, Oth er Asia, Africa, an d the Middle Ea st.  The s ame applies  to entr ies that read , “--.”  The  
sample is 4,285 majority -owned foreign affiliates of U.S. mu ltinationals that belo ng to a parent that has as least two 
foreign affiliates .  The y ear is 1994. 
 
Source :  Authors ’ calculations using data from th e U.S. Bu reau of Economic An alysis. 
 36    
 
Table 4:  Baseline Estim ation Results  for Im ported Interm ediate Inputs 
Regressor (1) (2) (3) 
More-Skilled Wages 0.007 0.027 0.028 
 (0.011) (0.010)** (0.010)** 
Less-Skilled Wages -0.046 -0.046 -0.045 
 (0.010)** (0.011)** (0.009)** 
Capital Rental Rate 0.003 0.001 0.001 
 (0.006) (0.005) (0.005) 
(1 + Trade Costs) -0.640 -0.333 -0.262 
 (0.080)** (0.089)** (0.078)** 
(1 – Corporate Tax Rate) 0.009 0.028 0.044 
 (0.031) (0.029) (0.028) 
Output -0.008 -0.007 -0.007 
 (0.004)* (0.004) (0.004) 
Adjacent to United States  0.126 0.126 
  (0.014)** (0.013)** 
Export-Processing Zone  0.043 0.048 
  (0.015)** (0.015)** 
Non-Tariff Barriers  0.020 0.021 
  (0.012) (0.012) 
Host-Market Size  -0.043 -0.045 
  (0.010)** (0.008)** 
Econom ic Freedom   -0.037 -0.040 
  (0.009)** (0.006)** 
 
Notes :  See continuation  of th is table on  next page. 
 
 37    
Table 4:  Bas eline Estima tion Results (Continued) 
Regressor (1) (2) (3) 
English Speaking  -0.006  
  (0.009)  
(1 – Value-Added Tax Rate)  0.029  
  (0.046)  
Fixed Exchange Rate w/ U.S.  0.021  
  (0.015)  
FDI Openness  -0.001  
  (0.006)  
U.S. Materials Share of Sales  0.075  
  (0.051)  
Controls Parent-Industry Parent-Industry Parent-Industry 
No. Observations 4,102 4,102 4,102 
Adjusted R-Squared 0.40 0.48 0.48 
 
Notes :  Each co lumn of this  table estimates a specification of equation (7) us ing the regr essors of that colum n.  The 
dependen t variable is imported intermedia te inputs for furthe r pro cessing from  the United S tates as a share of  affiliate 
total rev enues (p lus inventor y changes).  Cell en tries are OL S param eter es timates (and s tandard errors that allow for 
both arbitrar y forms of  heteroskedasticity  and cor relations in  disturbances within p arent-industr y groups).  * indicates 
that a p arameter estimate is  different from  zero at the 5% s ignifi cance lev el; ** at the 1% leve l.  Al l specifications also 
includ e 777 parent-b y-industr y dummy  variables.  All regressors  in column (1), as well as  Host-Market Size, (1- Value-
Added Tax Rate), and U.S. Mate rials Share of S ales, are in log arithms.  See text for equation (7) an d details on variable  
definitions and  construction . 
 
 
 38    
Table 5:  Estimation Results , Alternative Estimators 
Regressor (1) (2) (3) 
More-Skilled Wages 0.068  0.033 
 (0.013)**  (0.009)** 
Less-Skilled W ages -0.097  -0.050 
 (0.013)**  (0.009)** 
Capital Rental Rate 0.010 0.001 0.002 
 (0.005)* (0.005) (0.004) 
(1 + Trade Costs) -0.359 -0.211 -0.360 
 (0.089)** (0.107)* (0.182)* 
(1 – Corporate Tax Rate) 0.032  0.076 
 (0.051)  (0.036)* 
Output 0.008 -0.007 -0.007 
 (0.003)** (0.004) (0.002)** 
Adjacent to United States 0.133  0.123 
 (0.012)**  (0.014)** 
Export-Processing Zone 0.089  0.049 
 (0.015)**  (0.014)** 
Non-Tariff Barriers 0.020 0.025 0.023 
 (0.011) (0.014) (0.008)** 
Host-Market Size -0.086  -0.044 
 (0.010)**  (0.007)** 
Econom ic Freedom  -0.079  -0.038 
 (0.008)**  (0.007)** 
Estim ator Tobit OLS IV 
Controls Industry Country Parent-Industry 
No. of Obse rvations 4,102 4,102 3,977 
Adjusted R-Squared  0.49  
 
Notes :  Ea ch col umn of this  table es timates our preferred s pecification of equatio n (7) usi ng the estimator and con trols 
indic ated.  The dependen t variable is im ported  intermediate inputs for further p rocessing from the United States as a 
share of affiliate total revenu es (plus invento ry changes).  Cell entries are p arameter estimates (and standard  errors  that 
allow for both arbitrar y forms of heterosked asticity  and corr elations in disturbances within  parent-industr y groups).  *  
indic ates tha t a param eter estim ate is di fferent f rom zero at the 5% s ignifican ce level; ** at th e 1% level.  See text for 
equation (7)  and details on v ariable definitions and construction . 
 
 39   
  
40  Table 6:  Estimation Results , Export-Intensity Regressand 
Regressor (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
More-Skilled Wages 0.003 0.014 0.038  0.015 
 (0.010) (0.010) (0.019)*  (0.010) 
Less-Skilled Wages -0.042 -0.020 -0.087  -0.023 
 (0.010)** (0.009)* (0.020)**  (0.011)* 
Capital Rental Rate -0.019 -0.020 -0.056 -0.021 -0.021 
 (0.005)** (0.005)** (0.008)** (0.005)** (0.004)** 
(1 + Trade Costs) -0.583 -0.222 -0.719 -0.222 -0.307 
 (0.113)** (0.123) (0.140)** (0.152) (0.116)** 
(1 – Corporate Tax Rate) -0.006 0.093 0.201  0.092 
 (0.035) (0.034)** (0.075)**  (0.042)** 
Output -0.003 -0.001 0.047 -0.001 -0.001 
 (0.005) (0.004) (0.004)** (0.005) (0.003) 
Adjacent to United States  0.143 0.217  0.138 
  (0.015)** (0.017)**  (0.012)** 
Export-Processing Zone  0.057 0.139  0.059 
  (0.023)* (0.023)**  (0.014)** 
Non-Tariff Barriers  0.016 0.011 0.021 0.013 
  (0.018) (0.018) (0.021) (0.010) 
Host-Market Size  -0.015 0.004  -0.016 
  (0.008) (0.016)  (0.008)* 
Economic Freedom  -0.011 -0.045  -0.009 
  (0.007) (0.013)**  (0.007) 
Estimator OLS OLS Tobit OLS IV 
Controls Parent-Ind. Parent-Ind . Industry Country Parent-Ind. 
No. of Observations 4,102 4,102 4,102 4,085 4,102 
Adjusted R-Squared 0.48 0.54  0.55  
 
Notes :  Each column of this table estimates a specification of equation (7) replacing equation (7)’s regressand with the share of 
affiliate sales accounted for by exports to the United States.  Each spec ification uses the estimator and controls indicated.  Cell 
entries are parameter estimates (and standard errors that allow for both arbitrary forms of heteroskedasticity and correlations  in 
disturbances within parent-industry groups).  * indicates that a parameter estimate is different from zero at the 5% significan ce 
level; ** at the 1% level.  See text for equation (7) and details on variable definitions and construction. 